Headline: UK, France “Sabotaging” U.S. Efforts To End Ukraine War, Russian Intel Claims; Is Europe Keen On A Clash With Moscow? OPED
URL: https://www.eurasiantimes.com/uk-france-sabotaging-u-s-efforts-to-end-ukraine/

UK, France “Sabotaging” U.S. Efforts To End Ukraine War, Russian Intel Claims; Is Europe Keen On A Clash With Moscow? OPED
By EurAsian Times Desk -
April 26, 2025
Share FacebookTwitterWhatsAppReddIt
The Russian Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR) reported on April 24 that European intelligence agencies are manufacturing accusations about US President Donald Trump’s ties to Moscow to sabotage his peacekeeping efforts.
According to Russian media, they noted that European warmongers are launching a campaign to undermine the American leader’s peacekeeping efforts.
The department added that Paris and London are showing the greatest interest in information about American projects with Russian gas and oil companies. It is specified that these falsifications are intended to be used to undermine US policy and destroy the negotiation process for a peaceful settlement of the Ukraine war.
Why Europe Wants A Clash With Russia?
The predominant view among Western elites is that the end of the Cold War heralded the supremacy of a liberal international order, in which “liberal democracy must prevail.”
Viewing the war in Ukraine in ideological terms, this premise is shared widely and strongly among the Western elites and leaders. Trump’s victory may have silenced these elites for now in the US, but their counterparts in Europe continue to be strong and control almost all the governments.
Obviously, they seem to be disappointed with Trump as the President of the United States. Trump is quintessentially a “realist” in international affairs, believing in a “balance of power” among the major nations to promote national interest.
During his first term as President, Trump proved that he was truly unique among modern U.S. leaders. Unlike any President before him in the post-1945 era, he was skeptical of treaties and alliances, preferring competition to cooperation. He defined the national interest to exclude things such as the spread of liberal values and military or humanitarian interventions.
Edited image of US President Donald Trump with European leaders in the background.
He did not view the United States as a divine intervener for the mistreated abroad. Instead, he shifted Washington’s focus to great-power competition and regaining the United States’ global power advantages.
In other words, he is a true realist who avoids idealistic and ideological views of global affairs in favor of power politics.
As Andrew Byers,  Non-resident Fellow at Texas A&M University’s Albritton Center for Grand Strategy, and Randall L. Schweller, Professor of Political Science and Director of the Program for the Study of Realist Foreign Policy at Ohio State University, argue, Trump is for avoiding the use of U.S. military force.
This is not because he is more humanitarian than his predecessors but because he views world politics more in geoeconomic terms than geostrategic ones. So, he tries to conduct conflict via economic rather than military means.
“I want to invade, if I have to, economically,” Trump said in 2019, when talking about Iran and its nuclear program. “We have tremendous power economically. If I can solve things economically, that’s the way I want it.”
For Byers and Schweller, Trump’s “America first” agenda is “an intellectually defensible, fundamentally realist program that seeks to ascertain and act on the United States’ national interests rather than the interests of others. It is born of an inescapable premise: the United States no longer has the power it once did and is spreading itself too thin. It needs to sort its essential national interests from desirable ones. It must devolve more responsibility to its wealthy allies. It must stop trying to be everywhere and do everything.”
However, this is something the European elites are not prepared to reconcile with. As John J. Mearsheimer, the R. Wendell Harrison Distinguished Service Professor of Political Science at the University of Chicago, has explained, they remain deeply committed to what is said to be their “triple package of policies” —NATO enlargement, EU expansion, and democracy promotion. For them, Ukraine’s choice to join Europe will accelerate “the demise of the ideology of Russian imperialism that Putin represents.”
In fact, as Eldar Mamedov, a Brussels-based foreign policy expert, has recently pointed out,  ever since the eruption of the crisis in Ukraine (even before the Russian invasion),  there has been “McCarthyism, European style” to crack down on any dissenting voice in Ukraine. Those who differ with these elites on Ukraine have been smeared and delegitimized as Kremlin mouthpieces and subjected to harassment, marginalization, and ostracism.
Unlike their counterparts in the United States, ruling elites in the countries that have joined NATO in recent years have systematically suppressed any reasoned debates and discussions on joining the military alliance in their respective countries.
File Image: Macron & Starmer
In the narratives of these European elites, there cannot be any scope for reconciliation with Putin and Russia until their eventual and total subjugation to the international order as determined by them. And that is the reason why they are said to have more or less brainwashed/pressurized Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky to remain uncompromising and rigid on any talks on peace or ceasefire agreement with Russia.
It is worth noting that in March 2022, when both Ukraine and Russia were close to a deal, European leaders convinced Zelensky to backtrack with assurances and narratives that a military “victory” over Russia was imminent, backed by their support.
Reportedly, this deal talked of Russia withdrawing to its position on February 23, 2022 (the day it invaded Ukraine), when it controlled part of the Donbas region and all of Crimea. In exchange, Ukraine would promise not to seek NATO membership and instead receive security guarantees from several countries.
In retrospect, had this deal been finalized, it would have been much better than the situation Ukraine is currently in. Ukraine has lost more territories to Russia and is farther away from achieving anything remotely resembling a military victory than at any point since February 2022.
According to reports, the then-British Prime Minister, Boris Johnson, reportedly sabotaged the 2022 deal. He visited Ukraine and urged Zelensky to break off talks with Russia for two key reasons: Putin cannot be negotiated with, and the West isn’t ready for the war to end.
Johnson’s role in undermining the talks is now generally acknowledged. In fact, none other than Johnson himself admitted recently that he saw the war in Ukraine as “a proxy war”  against Russia.
But then, Johnson, all said and done, represented the narrative of the dominant Western elites in general. Its principal theme is that most of Europe, including Ukraine and many parts of Russia, must be “westernized” (Europeanized). In fact, long before the Ukraine war, this policy was pursued systematically.
As pundits now acknowledge, at least in the United States, it began at the beginning of this century with the eastward expansion of the European Union and NATO and then the sponsorship of pro-democracy movements, such as the so-called Orange Revolution in 2004 in Ukraine.
Viewed thus, realist scholars say that Putin, or for that matter any proud Russian leader in his place, would have stuck to the traditional balance of power theory that describes a state of equilibrium between nations so that any one state or group of states does not gain too much power and become a threat to others. And it is understandable why Russia sees Ukraine as a bulwark against NATO and Kyiv’s possible membership in the Alliance as a “redline.”
Keeping Ukraine out of NATO and preventing its total “Europeanization” is a “matter of life and death” for the Kremlin.
Perhaps, Trump, the realist, realizes this well.
That is why he is urging negotiations to end the war through a modus vivendi between the West and Russia. He seems to believe in the principle of coexistence by abandoning the liberal-Western plan to Europeanize Ukraine and make it a member of NATO.
Author and veteran journalist Prakash Nanda is Chairman of the Editorial Board of the EurAsian Times and has been commenting on politics, foreign policy, and strategic affairs for nearly three decades. He is a former National Fellow of the Indian Council for Historical Research and a recipient of the Seoul Peace Prize Scholarship.
Story republished with added information.
CONTACT: prakash.nanda (at) hotmail.com
Share
Previous article
Landing The ‘Elephant’ On China’s Aircraft Carriers! Engineers Work On ‘Computer Model’ To Land J-36 On Big Warships
Next article
After Stealth Drone, Abrams MBT, Sidewinder Missile, “Brand New” StormBreaker Missile Could End Up Russian, Iranian Hands?
EurAsian Times Desk
https://www.eurasiantimes.com/
The EurAsian Times Desk (ET Desk) comprises authors, reporters, interns, newswires, etc who directly work under the Editorial Desk of The EurAsian Times and senior Editors of the media house.

